
## Checksheet: Deprecations

This check list contains nearly every deprecation in Rails 3.  Many of them probably won't apply to you, but most of them will probably bite you in one place or another.

### General/configuration

&nbsp; | Deprecation | How to fix it
-----|-------------------|--------------:
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `RAILS_ENV` is deprecated. | Change it to `Rails.env`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `RAILS_ROOT` is deprecated. | Change it to `Rails.root`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `RAILS_DEFAULT_LOGGER` is deprecated. | Change it to `Rails.logger`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Calling `filter_parameter_logging` is no longer supported. | Set/append to `config.filter_parameters` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `AC::Dispatcher.before_dispatch` is deprecated. | Please use `ActionDispatch::Callbacks.before` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `AC::Dispatcher.to_prepare` is deprecated. | Please use `config.to_prepare` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Creating new `AC::Dispatcher` objects is deprecated. | Create/interact with the `Rails::Application` object instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `config.frameworks` is deprecated. | Look in `boot.rb` for information on limiting the frameworks that are loaded. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `config.gem` is deprecated. | Use a `Gemfile` with `bundler`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `config.action_controller.`<br />`consider_all_requests_local` is deprecated. | Use `Rails.application.`<br />`config.consider_all_requests_local`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `config.action_controller.`<br />`allow_concurrency` is deprecated. | Use `Rails.application.`<br />`config.allow_concurrency` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `benchmark(:level)` has been deprecated. | Use `benchmark("message", :level => level)` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `config.view_path` / `config.view_path=` are deprecated. | Use `paths.app.views` / `paths.app.views=` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `config.routes_configuration_file` / `config.routes_configuration_file=` are deprecated. | Use `paths.config.routes` / `paths.config.routes=`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `config.routes_configuration_file` / `config.routes_configuration_file=` are deprecated. | Use `paths.config.routes` / `paths.config.routes=` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `config.database_configuration_file` / `config.database_configuration_file=` have been deprecated. |   Do `paths.config.`<br />`database`/`paths.config.`<br />`database=` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `config.controller`<br />`_paths` / `config.controller`<br />`_paths=` are deprecated. | Use `paths.app.`<br />`controllers` / `paths.app.`<br />`controllers=`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `config.log_path` / `config.log_path=` are deprecated. | Do `paths.log` / `paths.log=` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | The `gem` method in application templates deprecated the `:env` key. | Change it to `:only` |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | The `freeze!` method in application templates is deprecated. | It's no longer needed. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `Object#metaclass` is deprecated. | Use `Object#singleton_class`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `rails:freeze:gems` is deprecated. | Use Bundler and `bundle install`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `rails:freeze:edge` is deprecated. | Use Bundler's Git support and `bundle install`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `rails:unfreeze` is deprecated. | Use Bundler. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `Date#last_year` is deprecated. | Use `Date#prev_year`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `Date#last_month` is deprecated. | Use `Date#prev_month`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `Object#returning` is deprecated. | Use `Object#tap` or another modern Ruby equivalent. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `class_inheritable_attribute` is frowned upon. | Not officially deprecated but you should use `class_attribute` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `superclass_delegating_accessor` is deprecated. | Use the `extlib` version. |
{.deprecation-table}

### Plugins

&nbsp; | Deprecation | How to fix it
-----|-------------------|--------------:
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Putting Rake tasks in `[path]/tasks` or `[path]/rails/tasks` is no longer supported.  | Place them in `[path]/lib/tasks`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Putting generators in `[path]/generators` or `[path]/rails_generators` is no longer supported.  | Place them in `[path]/lib/generators`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Generator classes do not inherit from `Rails::Generator` anymore.  | They must inherit from a `Rails::Generators::*` class (usually `Base`). |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | The use of `rails/init.rb` is deprecated.  | Put the logic in a top level/plugin root `init.rb`. |
{.deprecation-table}

### Controllers/dispatch

&nbsp; | Deprecation | How to fix it
-----|-------------------|--------------:
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Disabling sessions for a single<br />controller has been deprecated. | Sessions are lazy loaded, so don't worry about them if you don't use them. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Setting `AC::Base.session_store`<br />directly is deprecated. | Use `config.action_controller.`<br />`session_store`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Setting `AC::Base.session_options`<br />directly is deprecated. | Use `config.action_controller.`<br />`session_options`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Setting `AC::Base.relative_url_root`<br />is no longer effective. | Use a Rack middleware for the same effect. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `session.update` is no longer effective. | Use `session.replace` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `session.delete` is deprecated. | Use `session.clear` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `SessionHash#session_id` is deprecated. | Use `request.session_options[:id]` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `SessionHash#data` is deprecated. | Use `SessionHash#to_hash` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Overriding `default_url_options` is deprecated. | Use `self.url_options=` instead (usually in a `before_filter`). |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `Request#path` is deprecated. | Use `Request#path` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `Request#request_uri` is deprecated. | Use `Request#request_uri` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `AC::Base.use_accept_header` is deprecated. | (No fix; the accept header is always taken into account now) |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `AC::Base.resource_action_separator` is deprecated. | (No fix; only works with legacy router API) |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `AC::Base.ip_spoofing_check` is deprecated. | Configure it on your application with `Rails.application.config.`<br />`action_dispatch.ip_spoofing_check=` |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `AC::Base.trusted_proxies=` is deprecated. | Configure it on your application with `Rails.application.config.`<br />`action_dispatch.trusted_proxies` |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `AC::Base.cookie_verifier_secret=` is deprecated. | Configure it on your application with `Rails.application.config.`<br />`secret_token=` |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `AC::Base.perform_caching=` is deprecated. | Configure it on your application with `Rails.application.config.`<br />`perform_caching=` |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `AC::Base.page_cache_directory=` is deprecated. | Configure it on your application with `Rails.application.config.`<br />`page_cache_directory=` |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `AC::Base.asset_path=` is deprecated. | Configure it on your application with `Rails.application.config.`<br />`asset_path=` |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `AC::Base.helpers_path=` is deprecated. | Configure it on your application with `Rails.application.config.`<br />`helpers_path=` |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `verify` and its related functionality has been removed. | Install the verify plugin<br /> (`http://github.com/rails/verify`) |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | The `:name_prefix` option in the router DSL has been deprecated. | Use `:as` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | The Rails 2.x router DSL has been deprecated. | (No fix; it will be totally removed in 3.1) |
{.deprecation-table}

### Models

&nbsp; | Deprecation | How to fix it
-----|-------------------|--------------:
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Providing hash arguments to finder methods such as `find`, `first`, and `all` is deprecated. | Use `where` or other appropriate Active Record method. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Providing hash arguments to calculation methods such as `count`, `sum`, `average`, `calculate`, `maximum`, and `minimum` has been deprecated. | Chain these methods with `where` and other appropriate Active Record methods. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Providing hash arguments to `update_all` or `delete_all` is deprecated. | Use the appropriate Active Record methods to compose the query instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `named_scope` is deprecated. | Change to `scope`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `Model.human_name` is deprecated. | Use `Model.model_name.human`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Adding callback methods named `after_save`, `after_create`, etc. is deprecated. | Create a method then call `after_save :method_name` (or whatever callback). |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `errors.on_base` is deprecated. | Use `errors[:base]`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `errors.add_to_base` is deprecated. | Use `errors[:base] << error` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `errors.invalid?(attr)` has been deprecated. | Use `errors[attr].any?`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `errors.each_full` is deprecated. | Use `errors.to_a.each` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Providing a block to `composed_of` is deprecated. | Provide a `:converter` argument with a lambda/`Proc`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `colorize_logging` has been moved. | Change the calls to `Rails::Subscriber.`<br />`colorize_logging`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `save(false)` has been removed. | Use `save(:validate => false)` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `with_exclusive_scope` does not work with Active Relation. | Remove the exclusive scope by calling `unscoped` on the object. |
{.deprecation-table}

### Views

&nbsp; | Deprecation | How to fix it
-----|-------------------|--------------:
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `link_to_function` and `button_to_function` are gone. | Use standard JavaScript and HTML to build these links and buttons. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `remote_form_for` and `link_to_remote` are deprecated. | Use standard `form_for` and `link_to` with the `:remote => true` option. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `error_message_on` takes an option hash instead of separate arguments. | Pass an options hash with `:prepend_text`, `:append_text`, and `:css_class` keys. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `number_with_delimiter` takes an options hash instead of arguments. |  Pass a hash with `:delimiter` and `:precision` keys. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `number_with_precision` takes an options hash rather than an argument. | Pass an options hash with a `:precision` key. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `number_to_human_size` takes an options hash rather than an argument. | Pass an options hash with a `:precision` key. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `truncate` takes an options hash instead of arguments. |  Pass a hash with `:length` and `:omission` keys. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `:popup` is deprecated on `link_to`. | (No fix) |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `form_for(:model)` is deprecated. | Use `form_for(@obj, :object_name => :model)`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Helpers that add output can not use `concat` with `<% / %>`. | Return a string and it will be appended to the output. |
{.deprecation-table}

### Testing

&nbsp; | Deprecation | How to fix it
-----|-------------------|--------------:
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `model_instance.assert_valid` is deprecated. | Use `assert model_instance.valid?` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.template` is deprecated. | Use `controller.template`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.session` has been deprecated. | Use `request.session` instead.|
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.assigns` is deprecated. | Use `controller.assigns` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.layout` is deprecated. | Use `controller.template.layout`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.redirected_to` has been deprecated. | Use `response.redirect_url` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.redirect_url_match?` is deprecated. | Use `assert_match` and `response.redirect_url` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.rendered` has been deprecated. | Use `template.rendered` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.flash` is deprecated. | Use `request.flash`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.has_flash?` has been deprecated. | Use `request.flash.any?` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.has_flash_with_contents?` is deprecated. | Use `request.flash.any?`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.has_flash_object?` has been deprecated. | Use `request.flash[name]`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.has_session_object?` has been deprecated. | Use `request.session[name]` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.template_objects` is deprecated. | Use `template.assigns`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.has_template_object?` is deprecated. | Use `tempate.assigns[name].nil?`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `response.binary_content` is deprecated. | Use `response.body` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `test/mocks` won't be added to load paths automatically. | Add it yourself. |
{.deprecation-table}

### Mailers

&nbsp; | Deprecation | How to fix it
-----|-------------------|--------------:
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `recipients` is deprecated. | Provide a `:to` option to the new `mail` method. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `from` is deprecated. | Provide a `:from` option to the new `mail` method. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `subject` is deprecated. | Provide a `:subject` option to the new `mail` method. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `body` is deprecated. | Use instance variable (like a controller) |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Setting `:body` variables has been deprecated. | Use normal instance variables (like a controller) |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `attachment` is deprecated. | Place attachments' data keyed to their filename in the `attachments` `Hash`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `default_charset` is deprecated. | Change it to `default :charset => value`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `default_content_type` is deprecated. | Change it to `default :content_type => value`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `default_mime_version` is deprecated. | Change it to `default :mime_version => value`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `default_implicit_parts_order` is deprecated. | Change it to `default :implicit_parts_order => value`. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Calling `deliver` on the class instance | Call `deliver` on the mail object instance. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Setting `template_root=` | Use `prepend_view_path` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Delivering mail with `deliver_*` | Use the `deliver` on the mailer instance instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Creating a mail message with `create_*` | Call the mailer method and call `to_s` on the returned mail object |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `render_message` on `Message` is deprecated. | Use `render` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `set_content_type` on `Message` is deprecated. | Use `content_type` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `transfer_encoding` on `Message` is deprecated. | Use `content_transfer_encoding` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | Setting `transfer_encoding=` on `Message` is deprecated. | Set `content_transfer_encoding=` instead. |
&#10063;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; | `original_filename` on `Message` is deprecated. | Use `filename` instead. |
{.deprecation-table}

